
1 Implementing MPT
The file HW3data.csv contains monthly historical returns of 5 industry portfolios from July
1926 to December 2014. (Source: Professor Kenneth French’s website.)
Note: this is that same data that you used in Question 3 of Problem Set 2.
(a) Compute the annualized expected returns and covariance matrix. (Hint: Estimate the
expected returns and covariance matrix of monthly returns first, then multiply them by
12.) Note: this is the same question as 3(a) on Problem Set 2.
(b) Assume that the risk-free rate is 3%. Find the MVE portfolio weights and compute its
Sharpe Ratio.
(c) You have been hired to manage the portfolio of a mean-variance investor with a coefficient
of risk aversion γ = 3. You have decided to invest in these 5 industry portfolios and
the risk free asset. Find the optimal portfolio weights for the investors and compute the
Sharpe Ratio of the portfolio.
(d) How does the Sharpe Ratio in part (b) compare to the one in part (c)? Explain.
1
2 The Geometry of the MVF
Suppose there is no riskless asset and we have three stocks: A, B and C. Their expected
returns are given by
r =



10%
20%
30%


 .
The covariance matrix is
V =



1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 1


 .
(a) Let p be a portfolio on the minimum-variance frontier (MVF). Write the return standard
deviation of p, σp, as a function of its expected return rp.
(b) Using the result you obtained from part (a), plot the MVF.
(c) Find the global minimum-variance portfolio xGM V .
(d) Label the minimum-variance portfolio p′ with E[rp′ ] = 25% on the MVF you draw in
part (b).
(e) Find a portfolio p′′ on the MVF which is uncorrelated with p′ and label it on the plot
you draw in part (b). p′′ is called the zero-beta portfolio for p′.
(f) Now draw a straight line that passes through (0, rp′′ ) and (σp′ , rp′ ). What do you find?
Hint: you should conclude that you have found a geometric method to determine the
expected return of the zero-beta portfolio for almost any portfolio on the MVF.
3 Implementing MPT with Portfolio Constraints
Let us revisit the portfolio problem in Topic 2, but in the face of portfolio constraints. As
before, you can invest your wealth into either the riskless asset (1% per year) or in three
stock market indices with the following characteristics:
2
Asset E(r) σ
US 8.0% 19%
Japan 3.7% 25%
Mexico 6.0% 15%
Correlations
Assets US J M
US 1.0 0.5 0.8
J 0.5 1.0 0.2
M 0.8 0.2 1.0
(a) Compute the MVE portfolio weights and the Sharpe Ratio in the absence of portfolio
constraints. Verify that you get the same numbers as we got in the Topic 2 notes.
(b) Now impose a no short-sales constraint (i.e., the portfolio weight in each asset must be
non-negative). Based on your answer to part (i), for which asset will the constraint bind?
Hint: you do not need to use numerical methods in Excel or Matlab to solve this or any
other part of this question. Just use your common sense!
(c) Assuming that your answer to (ii) is correct, recompute the MVE portfolio weights and
the Sharpe ratio under the no short-sale constraint. How does the Sharpe ratio compare
to part (i). Explain.
(d) Under the no-short sales constraint, what are the optimal portfolio weights for a mean-
variance investor with γ = 2?
3